The Role of a Project Manager.
This section will define the responsibilities and attributes of a
project manager and what we expect from them.
First,
please relax and sit back for a moment as I share a little tale about a rabbit.
A man walked into a pet shop and was looking at animals on display.
While he was there another customer walked in and said to the salesperson,
"May I buy that C rabbit?
" The salesperson nodded and went over to the C cage at the
side of the store and took out a rabbit.
He fitted a little collar and leash, handed it to the customer saying,
"That'll be $1, 000.
" The customer paid and walked out with his rabbit.
Startled, the man went over to the salesperson and said,
"That was a very expensive rabbit!
"Most rabbits I ever bought or only ten bucks!
"Why did that cost so much?
" The salesperson answered, "Ah, that rabbit can program in C!
"Very fast, perfect code, no bugs, "well worth the money.
" The man looked at the cage on the other side of the store and said,
"Hey, that one's even more expensive!
"That one's $3, 000!
"What does that rabbit do?
" "Ah, that one's a C++ rabbit.
"It can manage object-oriented programming,
Visual C++, "even some job if you give him the right kind of food.
"All the really useful stuff, " said the salesperson.
The man looked around for a little longer and saw a
third rabbit in a cage all on its own,
way up high so he could see all the other rabbits.
And the price tag on that rabbit was $10, 000!
The man simply was shocked.
What could this rabbit possibly do?
The salesperson answered, "Well, I actually haven't seen it do a single thing,
"but it claims to be a project manager.
" That is a cute story but good,
quality project managers are more than worth their salary.
And in my experience,
being a project manager and working with project managers throughout my career,
I think it's one of the hardest and least appreciated jobs in our field.
So if you are a project manager or are considering being one, I commend you.
Now let's hop along to the next slide.
Here is a basic definition of a project manager.
Project managers have the responsibility of the initiation,
planning, execution, performance, monitoring and closure of a project.
In general PMs are organized, passionate and very goal-oriented individuals.
So,
if you're looking for excitement or like being in a spotlight of
driving a company or organization forward,
then project management is where you want to be.
Okay, let's see what else PMs are responsible for.
As a PM, you are 100% responsible for the success of your project.
And that's a lot of responsibility.
And unfortunately, sometimes you do not have the authority,
that is, the necessary pay grade, if you will,
and must instead use your great powers of influence
and leadership to get things done.
You are also responsible for the triple constraint of time,
cost and scope, also known as the Iron Triangle.
Now,
let's discuss the responsibilities of project
manager and their personal attributes.
Here are some of the responsibilities or duties of the project manager role.
Wears many hats and juggles many balls in the air.
PMs should be prepared to leverage and use all of their skills.
The person with the responsibility to manage a project.
Notice I did not say authority but they realize one of the
main challenges of being a project manager,
they may typically have the responsibility but not the authority,
since the team members may not directly report to them.
Now these are the job duties.
Initiation, that's the project start-up,
planning, execution, performance, monitoring and closure.
Central point of contact.
The PM should manage all project communications.
That's up, down, and across.
That is, up to management, down to the team,
and across to the customers or external vendors.
A PM will look at everything as a risk.
Okay, I might be a bit cynical or maybe just experienced,
but issue and risk management identification and
remediation are key elements of that role.
Now, let's check out a few more responsibilities of the project manager.
Creating clear and attainable project objectives.
Not as easy as it sounds when everyone is providing very
fuzzy or ever-changing scope requirements.
Building the project requirements of the customer or client and
maintaining the requirement's change management process.
That is a requirements change you got to know who asked for it,
when they need it, how it will affect the budget,
schedule and cost.
Bridging the gap between the project team and customer.
Many times the project team is highly technical and cannot always relate with
the customer from a pure business requirement standpoint,
so the project manager needs to know the business very well and maybe some
amount of technology in order to successfully bridge that gap.
Managing the constraints of cost, time, scope and quality.
This is where the project manager is likely to spend most of their time.
Please note the PM has many other things to attend to but much of their
time will be managing the ever-changing elements of cost,
time,
and scope which will have an immediate impact on
quality and customer expectations.
Now let's discuss the personal attributes required for a project manager.
Attributes of a project manager.
Now what I mean by attributes is not about what
project managers need to do per se,
but about their personal disposition and how they conduct themselves.
The first, people skills.
Project managers cultivate the people skills needed to develop trust
and communication among all our project stakeholders.
It sponsors those who will make use of the project's results and the end users,
and those who will provide the resources needed,
as well.
And lastly the project team members themselves.
Communication skills.
Certainly communication skills are a part of or a subset of people skills,
but I wanted to emphasize these in particular.
You must be able to write well, speak well,
make important and compelling presentations.
This characteristic is likely much more important
than what you are thinking it is.
Trust me,
it is and take note: Project manager must also have a flexible
toolkit of techniques resolving complex interdependent activities
into tasks and subtasks that are documented,
monitored and controlled.
They need to adapt their approach to the context
and constraints of each project,
knowing that no one size can fit all the variety of projects.
And they are always improving their own and their team skills
through lessons learned at the project completion.
A change agent.
A change agent is someone in the organization who helps an
organization transform itself by focusing on critical
business strategy improvements.
So project managers are change agents,
that is they make project goals their own and use their skills and expertise to
inspire a sense of shared purpose within the project team.
They are able to work well under pressure and are comfortable with
change and complexity and dynamic environments.
And lastly,
they can shift readily between big picture things and small but
crucial details and knowing when to concentrate on each.
In summary,
many project managers enjoy the challenges and the
responsibility of driving business results.
Now, let's look at one more attribute all PMs should have.
If you're thinking of getting into the PM world,
here's a personal tip, "Be candid with everyone.
" That's a quote by Jack Welch.
The attributes of a rock-solid project manager must include honesty,
trustworthiness and integrity.
Those elements will help sustain and propel you to
success where process alone may not.
Okay,
now let's check out a Pluralsight course that ties right into
the attributes needed for a project manager.
You may want to consider checking out another one of my
courses: Leadership and Communication Skills for Software
Engineers here on Pluralsight.
If you want to immediately make an impact on your
leadership and communication capabilities,
please consider this course, whether you are a software engineer,
team leader or other expert,
this course will help you be more effective at leading and managing people.
Okay,
let's first talk about the traditional project management process in
the next section and then we will move on to an Agile project management approach in this section after that.